# Modeling Brain Tissue Volumetric Changes after Radiotherapy
This repository contains the code related to the MSc Information Studies (DS track) thesis: 'Modeling Brain Tissue Volumetric Change after Radiotherapy'. In this thesis, private MRI data from UMC Amsterdam are used to model and analyze volumetric change rates of healthy-appearing brain tissue of patients who have undergone radiotherapy on their brain metastases. 

The code can unfortunately not be executed without access to the private medical data. Sharing of these data is not permitted as per UMC guidelines. Therefore the Jupyter Notebook in this GitHub repository only provides information on the specific code and methods that were used to obtain the final results of the thesis, as well as the outputs I got while running the code on actual data. 

---
## Abstract:
Brain metastases (BMs) are secondary brain tumors that frequently arise in cancer patients, leading to an extremely poor prognosis. While radiation therapy (RT) is a common treatment, its effects on healthy brain tissue remains underexplored, specifically in terms of volumetric changes of tumor-affected brain tissue. Existing studies often rely on linear models, which generally fail to capture the more complex nature of these changes over time. This study bridges this gap by introducing more advanced non-linear, double-layered modeling approaches to analyze and model longitudinal T1-weighted MRI data from patients with BMs, using SynthSeg for automated segmentations. The results demonstrate that significant, region-specific dose-dependent volumetric changes occur throughout the brain. Approximately half of the studied regions show volume decreases, most notably in subcortical gray and white matter, while the other half show increases in volume, including cortical regions and ventricles. In particular, a significant overall decrease in total brain tissue volume was observed after one year of RT (-7.94 mm³/day; \textit{$p<0.01$}). These findings confirm previous research on the brain's susceptibility to RT, while further emphasizing the sensitivity to radiation. This highlights the need for careful treatment planning to minimize negative effects on patients' quality of life (QoL).
